=============================
Applications and Publications
=============================

PETSc has been used for modeling in all of these areas: Acoustics, Aerodynamics, Air
Pollution, Arterial Flow, Bone Fractures, Brain Surgery, Cancer Surgery, Cancer Treatment,
Carbon Sequestration, Cardiology, Cells, CFD, Combustion, Concrete, Corrosion, Data
Mining, Dentistry, Earth Quakes, Economics, Esophagus, Fission, Fusion, Glaciers, Ground
Water Flow, Linguistics, Mantel Convection, Magnetic Films, Material Science, Medical
Imaging, Ocean Dynamics, Oil Recover, PageRank, Polymer Injection Molding, Polymeric
Membranes, Quantum computing, Seismology, Semiconductors, Rockets, Relativity, Surface
Water Flow.

Images
======

These are images and movies from application simulations developed by PETSc users.

* `COOLFluiD Simulation Environment
  <https://github.com/andrealani/COOLFluiD/wiki/Gallery-of-applications>`__

* `Defmod - Parallel multiphysics finite element code for modeling crustal deformation
  during the earthquake/rifting cycle <https://bitbucket.org/stali/defmod/wiki/Gallery>`__

* Pilhwa Lee, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

  * `Cardiopulmonary circulation simulation for the studying etiology of pulmonary
    arterial hypertension
    <http://www.cims.nyu.edu/~leep/UMich/Cardiopulmonary_circulation.html>`__

  * `Concentration dependent contraction of cardiomyocyte
    <http://www.cims.nyu.edu/~leep/UMich/Cardiac_differentiation.html>`__

  * `Micro-organism swimming in two-phase micro-environment
    <http://www.cims.nyu.edu/~leep/UMich/Cancer_metastasis.html>`__

* `Louis Moresi, Movie from a recent Nature paper using Underworld
  <http://youtu.be/cVulRP2tUGM>`__

* `MOOSE Full-core reactor simulation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xTfQxpGAI4>`__

* `Richard Katz, Journal of Petrology, 2008. doi 10.1016/j.jcp.2008.06.039
  <http://www.earth.ox.ac.uk/~richardk/res/magmaRidge/RidgeModelsKatz.mov>`__

Two simulations of plate tectonic spreading at a mid-ocean ridge, driving mantle upwelling
and melting. Axes are labelled with depth and distance in kilometres. Colours show the
volume fraction of magma present; solid streamlines show the mantle flow; dashed contours
are lines of constant temperature (the upper surface is cold, the deep mantle is hot);
tracer particles mark the motion of the magma, where it is present. The upper panel has a
plate speed of 1 cm/year; the bottom has 5 cm/year. Mid-ocean ridges host 80% of Earthâ€™s
volcanism. These simulation are PETSc-based numerical solutions of conservation of mass,
momentum, and energy for two phases (mantle rock; magma) and two thermochemical
components.

* `Fokker-Planck kinetic calculation of the parallel current in the W7-X fusion experiment
  in Greifswald, Germany. Contributed by Matt
  Landreman. <https://github.com/landreman/sfincs/blob/master/doc/SFINCS_calculation_of_parallel_current_in_W7X_2040x1260.jpg>`__

* `HiFi modeling framework, Vyacheslav Lukin
  <https://hifi-framework.webnode.com/hifi-framework/>`__

  * `High resolution image <https://www.nersc.gov/assets/ScienceAtNERSC/SlavaFull.png>`__

  * `Turbulence analysis of an experimental flux-rope plasma
    <https://iopscience.iop.org/0741-3335/56/6/064003/media/PPCF490028_movie1.mp4>`__

  * `SSX Plasma Wind Tunnel -- Counter-helicity Merging
    <https://www.dropbox.com/s/v2g8vzns7na685v/merging_field.mpeg?dl=0>`__

  * `Movie 1 <https://www.dropbox.com/s/nc4vwnxw3lt01mi/full_movie.mpeg?dl=0>`__ and
    `Movie 2 <https://www.dropbox.com/s/nn06fa8hsiqmqmw/zoom_movie.mpeg?dl=0>`__ from
    `Self-organization during spherical torus formation by flux rope merging in the Mega
    Ampere Spherical Tokamak
    <https://www.mcs.anl.gov/article/10.1088/0741-3335/56/6/064009>`__

* `CFDShip-Iowa simulations by Pablo Carrica <https://www.youtube.com/user/pcarrica>`__

* `Simulation of Greenland present-day ice surface speed; it is a result of a PISM
  simulation done by Andy Aschwanden at the University of Alaska Fairbanks
  <https://www.dropbox.com/s/3m8rphl81y70r3g/greenland-speed-pism.pdf?dl=0>`__

* `Design Optimization of Aircraft Wings <https://www.youtube.com/user/MDOLaboratory>`__
  discussed at http://mdolab.engin.umich.edu

* `Fast deformation
  <ftp://ftp.mcs.anl.gov/pub/petsc/images/FoldingAndErosion_FastDeformation.mov>`__ and
  `slower deformation
  <ftp://ftp.mcs.anl.gov/pub/petsc/images/FoldingAndErosion_SlowerDeformationSteeperInitialSlope.mov>`__
  from the code LaMEM developed by Boris Kaus, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz,
  Mainz, Germany.

The movies show the effects of erosion and tectonic motion on the deflection and folding
of rock units in the upper few kilometers of the Earth. In one case we have a slower
deformation rate and a steeper initial slope whereas on the other case tectonic
deformation is an order of magnitude faster. The resulting folding patterns have some
resemblance with natural folding patterns observed in the Zagros Mountains. From the paper
Collignon, M., Kaus, B., May, D.A., Fernandez, N., 2014. Influences of surface processes
on fold growth during 3-D detachment folding. Geochem Geophy Geosy
doi:10.1002/2014GC005450
